README.md, before:

[![Maven Central](https://img.shields.io/maven-central/v/com.esaulpaugh/headlong.svg?label=Maven%20Central)](https://central.sonatype.com/artifact/com.esaulpaugh/headlong)
[![Apache License, Version 2.0, January 2004](https://img.shields.io/github/license/apache/maven.svg?label=License)](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
[![jdk1.8+](https://img.shields.io/badge/JDK-1.8+-blue.svg)](https://openjdk.java.net/)
[![Java CI GraalVM Maven](https://github.com/esaulpaugh/headlong/actions/workflows/graalvm.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/esaulpaugh/headlong/actions/workflows/graalvm.yml)
[![Gitter](https://badges.gitter.im/esaulpaugh-headlong/community.svg)](https://gitter.im/esaulpaugh-headlong/community)

Contract ABI and Recursive Length Prefix made easy for the JVM.

ABI spec: https://solidity.readthedocs.io/en/latest/abi-spec.html

RLP spec: https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/data-structures-and-encoding/rlp

SHA-256 (headlong-12.3.3.jar): 9b577af538d30ffc05133425c8b0bff3a79bcba99955b3222dd2d825b27150cc

## Usage

### ABI package

#### Encoding Function Calls

```java
Function baz = Function.parse("baz(uint32,bool)"); // canonicalizes and parses any signature
// or
Function f2 = Function.fromJson("{\"type\":\"function\",\"name\":\"foo\",\"inputs\":[{\"name\":\"complex_nums\",\"type\":\"tuple[]\",\"components\":[{\"name\":\"real\",\"type\":\"fixed168x10\"},{\"name\":\"imaginary\",\"type\":\"fixed168x10\"}]}]}");

Pair<Long, Boolean> bazArgs = Tuple.of(69L, true);
Tuple complexNums = Single.of(new Tuple[] { Tuple.of(new BigDecimal("0.0090000000"), new BigDecimal("1.9500000000")) });

// Two equivalent styles:
ByteBuffer bazCall = baz.encodeCall(bazArgs);
ByteBuffer bazCall2 = baz.encodeCallWithArgs(69L, true);

System.out.println("baz call hex:\n" + Strings.encode(bazCall) + "\n"); // hexadecimal encoding (without 0x prefix)

Tuple recoveredArgs = baz.decodeCall(bazCall2); // decode the encoding back to the original args

System.out.println("baz args:\n" + recoveredArgs + "\n"); // toString()
System.out.println("equal:\n" + recoveredArgs.equals(bazArgs) + "\n"); // test for equality

System.out.println("baz call debug:\n" + baz.annotateCall(bazCall.array()) + "\n"); // human-readable, for debugging function calls (expects input to start with 4-byte selector)
System.out.println("baz args debug:\n" + baz.getInputs().annotate(bazArgs) + "\n"); // human-readable, for debugging encodings without a selector
System.out.println("f2 call debug:\n" + f2.annotateCall(complexNums) + "\n");
System.out.println("f2 args debug:\n" + f2.getInputs().annotate(complexNums));
```

#### Decoding Return Values

```java
Function foo = Function.parse("foo((fixed[],int8)[1][][5])", "(int,string)");

// decode return type (int256,string)
Tuple decoded = foo.decodeReturn(
    FastHex.decode(
          "000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000002A"
        + "0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000040"
        + "000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000e"
        + "59616f62616e6745696768747939000000000000000000000000000000000000"
    )
);

System.out.println(decoded.equals(Tuple.of(BigInteger.valueOf(42L), "YaobangEighty9")));
```

```java
Function fooTwo = Function.parse("fooTwo()", "(uint8)");
int returned = fooTwo.decodeSingletonReturn(FastHex.decode("00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000FF")); // uint8 corresponds to int
System.out.println(returned);
```

#### Using TupleType

```java
TupleType<Tuple> tt = TupleType.parse("(bool,address,int72[][])");
ByteBuffer b0 = tt.encode(Tuple.of(false, Address.wrap("0x52908400098527886E0F7030069857D2E4169EE7"), new BigInteger[0][]));
// Tuple t = tt.decode(b0); // decode the tuple (has the side effect of advancing the ByteBuffer's position)
// or...
Address a = tt.decode(b0, 1); // decode only index 1
System.out.println(a);
Tuple t2 = tt.decode(b0, 0, 2); // decode only indices 0 and 2
System.out.println(t2);

ByteBuffer b1 = tt.<ABIType<BigInteger[][]>>get(2).encode(new BigInteger[][] {  }); // encode only int72[][]
```

#### Misc

```java
Event<?> event = Event.fromJson("{\"type\":\"event\",\"name\":\"an_event\",\"inputs\":[{\"name\":\"a\",\"type\":\"bytes\",\"indexed\":true},{\"name\":\"b\",\"type\":\"uint256\",\"indexed\":false}],\"anonymous\":true}");
Tuple args = event.decodeArgs(new byte[][] { new byte[32] }, new byte[32]);
System.out.println(event);
System.out.println(args);

// create any type directly (advanced)
ArrayType<ABIType<Object>, ?, Object> at = TypeFactory.create("(address,int)[]");
ArrayType<TupleType<Tuple>, Tuple, Tuple[]> at2 = TypeFactory.create("(address,int)[]");
ArrayType<TupleType<Pair<Address, BigInteger>>, Pair<Address, BigInteger>, Pair<Address, BigInteger>[]> at3 = TypeFactory.create("(address,int)[]");
ABIType<Object> unknown = TypeFactory.create(at.getCanonicalType());
```

### RLP package

```java
// for an example class Student implementing some example interface
public Student(byte[] rlp) {
    Iterator<RLPItem> iter = RLPDecoder.RLP_STRICT.sequenceIterator(rlp);
    
    this.name = iter.next().asString(Strings.UTF_8);
    this.gpa = iter.next().asFloat(false);
    this.publicKey = iter.next().asBytes();
    this.balance = new BigDecimal(iter.next().asBigInt(), iter.next().asInt());
}

@Override
public Object[] toObjectArray() {
    return new Object[] {
            // instances of byte[]
            Strings.decode(name, Strings.UTF_8),
            FloatingPoint.toBytes(gpa),
            publicKey,
            balance.unscaledValue().toByteArray(),
            Integers.toBytes(balance.scale())
            // include an Object[] or Iterable and its elements will be encoded as an RLP list (which may include other lists)
    };
}

@Override
public byte[] toRLP() {
    return RLPEncoder.sequence(toObjectArray());
}
```

## Build

Now available in Maven Central Repository.

Or build locally:

Clone the project and install to your local maven repository using `gradle publishToMavenLocal` or `mvn install`, then declare it as a dependency:

```kotlin
implementation("com.esaulpaugh:headlong:12.3.4-SNAPSHOT")
```

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.esaulpaugh</groupId>
    <artifactId>headlong</artifactId>
    <version>12.3.4-SNAPSHOT</version>
</dependency>
```
Alternatively:

* Run `gradle build` or `gradle jar` which output to `build/libs`
* Use `mvn package` which outputs to `target`
* Execute `ant all build-jar` which outputs to `build/lib`
* Add headlong as a project dependency

## Benchmarks

![Screenshot](https://github.com/esaulpaugh/headlong/blob/master/benchmark_results.PNG)
GraalVM 20.0.2 on x86-64

## Command line interface

https://github.com/esaulpaugh/headlong-cli

## Example Android app

https://github.com/esaulpaugh/headlong-android

## Misc

Also includes optimized implementations of:

* EIP-778 Ethereum Node Records
* EIP-55 Mixed-case checksum address encoding
* Keccak
* hexadecimal

headlong depends on gson v2.1 or greater at runtime and v2.11.0 or greater at compile time. Test suite should take less than one minute to run. Test packages require junit. Jar size is ~128 KiB. Java 8+.

See the wiki for more, such as packed encoding (and decoding) and RLP Object Notation: https://github.com/esaulpaugh/headlong/wiki

Licensed under Apache 2.0 terms

Commit message:

add performance note to readme; minor refactor;

README.md, after:

[![Maven Central](https://img.shields.io/maven-central/v/com.esaulpaugh/headlong.svg?label=Maven%20Central)](https://central.sonatype.com/artifact/com.esaulpaugh/headlong)
[![Apache License, Version 2.0, January 2004](https://img.shields.io/github/license/apache/maven.svg?label=License)](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
[![jdk1.8+](https://img.shields.io/badge/JDK-1.8+-blue.svg)](https://openjdk.java.net/)
[![Java CI GraalVM Maven](https://github.com/esaulpaugh/headlong/actions/workflows/graalvm.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/esaulpaugh/headlong/actions/workflows/graalvm.yml)
[![Gitter](https://badges.gitter.im/esaulpaugh-headlong/community.svg)](https://gitter.im/esaulpaugh-headlong/community)

Contract ABI and Recursive Length Prefix made easy for the JVM.

ABI spec: https://solidity.readthedocs.io/en/latest/abi-spec.html

RLP spec: https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/data-structures-and-encoding/rlp

SHA-256 (headlong-12.3.3.jar): 9b577af538d30ffc05133425c8b0bff3a79bcba99955b3222dd2d825b27150cc

## Usage

### ABI package

#### Encoding Function Calls

```java
Function baz = Function.parse("baz(uint32,bool)"); // canonicalizes and parses any signature
// or
Function f2 = Function.fromJson("{\"type\":\"function\",\"name\":\"foo\",\"inputs\":[{\"name\":\"complex_nums\",\"type\":\"tuple[]\",\"components\":[{\"name\":\"real\",\"type\":\"fixed168x10\"},{\"name\":\"imaginary\",\"type\":\"fixed168x10\"}]}]}");

Pair<Long, Boolean> bazArgs = Tuple.of(69L, true);
Tuple complexNums = Single.of(new Tuple[] { Tuple.of(new BigDecimal("0.0090000000"), new BigDecimal("1.9500000000")) });

// Two equivalent styles:
ByteBuffer bazCall = baz.encodeCall(bazArgs);
ByteBuffer bazCall2 = baz.encodeCallWithArgs(69L, true);

System.out.println("baz call hex:\n" + Strings.encode(bazCall) + "\n"); // hexadecimal encoding (without 0x prefix)

Tuple recoveredArgs = baz.decodeCall(bazCall2); // decode the encoding back to the original args

System.out.println("baz args:\n" + recoveredArgs + "\n"); // toString()
System.out.println("equal:\n" + recoveredArgs.equals(bazArgs) + "\n"); // test for equality

System.out.println("baz call debug:\n" + baz.annotateCall(bazCall.array()) + "\n"); // human-readable, for debugging function calls (expects input to start with 4-byte selector)
System.out.println("baz args debug:\n" + baz.getInputs().annotate(bazArgs) + "\n"); // human-readable, for debugging encodings without a selector
System.out.println("f2 call debug:\n" + f2.annotateCall(complexNums) + "\n");
System.out.println("f2 args debug:\n" + f2.getInputs().annotate(complexNums));
```

#### Decoding Return Values

```java
Function foo = Function.parse("foo((fixed[],int8)[1][][5])", "(int,string)");

// decode return type (int256,string)
Tuple decoded = foo.decodeReturn(
    FastHex.decode(
          "000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000002A"
        + "0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000040"
        + "000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000e"
        + "59616f62616e6745696768747939000000000000000000000000000000000000"
    )
);

System.out.println(decoded.equals(Tuple.of(BigInteger.valueOf(42L), "YaobangEighty9")));
```

```java
Function fooTwo = Function.parse("fooTwo()", "(uint8)");
int returned = fooTwo.decodeSingletonReturn(FastHex.decode("00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000FF")); // uint8 corresponds to int
System.out.println(returned);
```

#### Using TupleType

```java
TupleType<Tuple> tt = TupleType.parse("(bool,address,int72[][])");
ByteBuffer b0 = tt.encode(Tuple.of(false, Address.wrap("0x52908400098527886E0F7030069857D2E4169EE7"), new BigInteger[0][]));
// Tuple t = tt.decode(b0); // decode the tuple (has the side effect of advancing the ByteBuffer's position)
// or...
Address a = tt.decode(b0, 1); // decode only index 1
System.out.println(a);
Tuple t2 = tt.decode(b0, 0, 2); // decode only indices 0 and 2
System.out.println(t2);

ByteBuffer b1 = tt.<ABIType<BigInteger[][]>>get(2).encode(new BigInteger[][] {  }); // encode only int72[][]
```

#### Misc

```java
Event<?> event = Event.fromJson("{\"type\":\"event\",\"name\":\"an_event\",\"inputs\":[{\"name\":\"a\",\"type\":\"bytes\",\"indexed\":true},{\"name\":\"b\",\"type\":\"uint256\",\"indexed\":false}],\"anonymous\":true}");
Tuple args = event.decodeArgs(new byte[][] { new byte[32] }, new byte[32]);
System.out.println(event);
System.out.println(args);

// create any type directly (advanced)
ArrayType<ABIType<Object>, ?, Object> at = TypeFactory.create("(address,int)[]");
ArrayType<TupleType<Tuple>, Tuple, Tuple[]> at2 = TypeFactory.create("(address,int)[]");
ArrayType<TupleType<Pair<Address, BigInteger>>, Pair<Address, BigInteger>, Pair<Address, BigInteger>[]> at3 = TypeFactory.create("(address,int)[]");
ABIType<Object> unknown = TypeFactory.create(at.getCanonicalType());
```

### RLP package

```java
// for an example class Student implementing some example interface
public Student(byte[] rlp) {
    Iterator<RLPItem> iter = RLPDecoder.RLP_STRICT.sequenceIterator(rlp);
    
    this.name = iter.next().asString(Strings.UTF_8);
    this.gpa = iter.next().asFloat(false);
    this.publicKey = iter.next().asBytes();
    this.balance = new BigDecimal(iter.next().asBigInt(), iter.next().asInt());
}

@Override
public Object[] toObjectArray() {
    return new Object[] {
            // instances of byte[]
            Strings.decode(name, Strings.UTF_8),
            FloatingPoint.toBytes(gpa),
            publicKey,
            balance.unscaledValue().toByteArray(),
            Integers.toBytes(balance.scale())
            // include an Object[] or Iterable and its elements will be encoded as an RLP list (which may include other lists)
    };
}

@Override
public byte[] toRLP() {
    return RLPEncoder.sequence(toObjectArray());
}
```

## Build

Now available in Maven Central Repository.

Or build locally:

Clone the project and install to your local maven repository using `gradle publishToMavenLocal` or `mvn install`, then declare it as a dependency:

```kotlin
implementation("com.esaulpaugh:headlong:12.3.4-SNAPSHOT")
```

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.esaulpaugh</groupId>
    <artifactId>headlong</artifactId>
    <version>12.3.4-SNAPSHOT</version>
</dependency>
```
Alternatively:

* Run `gradle build` or `gradle jar` which output to `build/libs`
* Use `mvn package` which outputs to `target`
* Execute `ant all build-jar` which outputs to `build/lib`
* Add headlong as a project dependency

## Benchmarks

![Screenshot](https://github.com/esaulpaugh/headlong/blob/master/benchmark_results.PNG)
GraalVM 20.0.2 on x86-64

## Command line interface

https://github.com/esaulpaugh/headlong-cli

## Example Android app

https://github.com/esaulpaugh/headlong-android

## Misc

Also includes optimized implementations of:

* EIP-778 Ethereum Node Records
* EIP-55 Mixed-case checksum address encoding
* Keccak
* hexadecimal

headlong depends on gson v2.1 or greater at runtime and v2.11.0 or greater at compile time. Test suite should take less than one minute to run. Test packages require junit. Jar size is ~128 KiB. Java 8+.

For best JSON parsing performance, make sure objects are compact and that the "type" field is positioned first. See ABIJSON.tryParseStreaming.

See the wiki for more, such as packed encoding (and decoding) and RLP Object Notation: https://github.com/esaulpaugh/headlong/wiki

Licensed under Apache 2.0 terms
